Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Hannah Schleihoff. She's uh
an assistant professor in the department for Developmental Psychology
at Utrecht University. Her research investigates socio-cognitive underpinnings of
cultural learning, focusing on how cultural novices, children during
early and middle childhood, grow into proficient cultural beings.
And today we're going to talk about children's ideas
about other people's beliefs, belief revision, revision, and other
related topics. So Hannah, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me. So,
when exactly do children start considering other people's beliefs?
So that's a, that's a pretty good first question.
Um, SO maybe let me first talk about what
belief is in general. And I know you've had
a lot of people talking about this on the
show and I think compared to the definitions that
they gave, mine is rather, rather minimal. Um, BUT
belief is, um, a representation, a mental representation that
we have, and it has the goal that it
is a representation of the world as, um, as
close to reality as possible. So the goal of
a belief is to, to be true. But sometimes
our representations, our knowledge about the world is incomplete
or maybe even false. So a belief can be
true, but it can also be false. And I
think it is important when we think about these
mental representations that there are many other kinds of
mental representations that we can have. So, beliefs is
one of them, but we can also um have
mental representations um about hopes, about goals, and about
perspective of, of others. And there is It's like
a developmental trajectory of how these develop. And beliefs
actually is rather the, the end, uh, goal of
this trajectory. So when can we think about other
um people's beliefs, it's something that develops rather late
compared to the others. Um, AND for example, there,
so, um, even there, there is a lot of
variance and a lot of inter interindividual variability in
this, I think, um, there's certain timelines or certain
age ranges, um, that are considered or that are
associated with important developmental changes. And one of them
is around 9 months of age. So there is
a time when kids start to understand other people's
perspective and goals. So, for example, they understand that
um somebody else sees something differently from their own,
so that they have a different perspective. And there
are studies, for example, where you see children see
two objects, but they, um, another person sitting across
from them only sees one. And then, um, they
expect that this agent reaches for the object that
the agent can see and not the object that
only the children can see, for example. And around
the same time, children also start to develop an
understanding of other people's goals, and that these goals
can also be different from their own. And they
also start to predict or expect that people behave
rationally considering the goals and the perspectives that they
have. So that you, um, take your own perspective
and your own goal into account when you make
a certain, um, action, when you plan your actions.
And then a little bit later, around the age
of 18 months, children also start to understand that
people's desires could be different from their own. And
there's one famous study by Alison Gopnik, where the,
the experimenter um pretended to like broccoli much more
than crackers, and the child themselves obviously liked the
crackers much more than, um than the broccoli. And
then the experimenter asked, so, can you please give
me, give me something of the one, That that
I liked the most, and kids younger than 18
months, I think the sample was actually they were
14 months old, they handed over the crackers, but
around 18 months, the kids understood that the experimenters'
preferences are different from their own and handed over
the broccoli. And then a little bit later, again,
around the age of 4, children really become to
be um understand that also people's beliefs can be
different from their own, and also can be different
from the, the true state of the world so
that we can also hold false beliefs. And around
that age, children typically pass these very famous like
false belief tests, and I think the most famous
one there is, is, um, When children observe how
an object is hidden in one of two boxes,
and, um, an agent sees how this is happening,
and then the agent leaves the stage, so the
agent thinks the object is, for example, in box
A, and then somebody else comes in and moves
this object and puts it in the other box.
And then, um, the kids observed this whole scene,
but the agent, the first agent was gone, so
he doesn't know where it is. But comes back
and then the children are asked, um, where would
this person now look for, for the object? And
kids around 4 years of age start to answer
this question, right? So they say the agent would
look in the first box where they um thought,
where they believed the object was hidden, even though
it's not a state of reality anymore. And kids
that are younger usually um still say that's in
the other box, and, Yeah, around that age, you
really, we would really say that children really start
to consider another person's belief because then they have
this like full blown understanding of um what a
belief is and that the belief can also be
false.
And why is it that people, not only children
but also adults, care about the beliefs that other
people hold? Why does it matter?
I think this is really fundamental to us being
such a social species, so understanding and being able
to navigate the social world is necessary for our
survival. And just to give you a few examples
where I think this matters, um, for example, when
we Yeah, predict other people's behavior, so imagine that
um I'm like going to a concert with my
friend tomorrow, but then I learn the concert is
being canceled, but my friend doesn't know it, so
I know that they would probably still show up,
so I predict that they show up at the
concert hall, if I don't inform them that the
concert was canceled, and um then I can, Use
this information to help them and write them a
text and tell them, your, the concert was canceled,
um, you should not go there. So I can
use this information to predict other people's behavior and
then help them. But for example, you could also
use it to deceive others if for whatever reason,
I do. I, the concert is actually happening, but
I don't want my friend to to go. I
could also tell them the concert was canceled even
though it's still happening, so I could also deceive
someone with this knowledge. And it also enables us
to really share a common vision so we can
have, if we know what another person believes, I
can, um, change this person's beliefs so that we
have a common vision. So it's really a sort
of, The foundation of collaboration and us working together.
And I think one other um important topic that
is important to us humans, we are really concerned
about what other people's beliefs about, believe about us.
So we're really concerned about our reputation and being
aware of what another person believes helps us also
to manage our reputation and maybe behave in certain
ways, um, uh, in front of certain people or
maybe also in others. So I think those are
just a few examples. Um, THAT really illustrate that
we use the skill to think about other people's
beliefs pretty much all the time every day.
And what are the kinds of beliefs that people
tend to care about?
I think that um people care about others' beliefs
when those beliefs are related um or in some
way like meaningful and relevant to their um own
lives, to themselves, um, and also in certain contexts.
And just to give you a simple example, I
think when I'm like on. Uh, IN the traffic,
I'm driving a car and I believe that the
other driver thinks that the traffic light is green,
even though I know that it's red. That is
like an important like piece of information that is
um That could save my life. And this is
a fact-based belief. So here I'm like making some
inferences about the, the other um potential like facts
that the other person thinks that are facts um
in the world, but there's also other kinds of
beliefs um that are, are seem to be almost
a little bit more complex, for example, when I'm
trying to, Decide who um to spend time with,
uh, with, um, who are my friends, what kind
of values do they have, and what, yeah, kind
of people do I want to surround myself with,
then I might also think about what kind of
core beliefs, what kind of core values they have,
so that I can decide um who, who to
spend my time with, who to learn from, who
to befriend. And I think those beliefs are more
like value-based beliefs. So there we are not making
inferences so much about Facts and evidence, but more
about what do people, what values do people hold.
Right, OK, so you've already told us that about
fact-based and value-based beliefs, we're going to come back
to them later, but it is one thing for
people to hold particular beliefs, but it is another
thing for them to have control over their own
beliefs. Uh, WHAT kinds of intuitions do children and
adults have about that?
Yeah, that's a great question there. Um, I need
to mention here, Joshua Konfer, who is, um, a
PhD student at UC Berkeley and actually just, um,
just graduated, and he is really interested in this
topic and ran a few studies where he is
interested or investigated what kind of intuitions adults and
also younger children have about What kind of beliefs
other people can hold and how free they are
in choosing of what kinds of beliefs, um, they,
they choose to hold and um he starts his
paper by giving this example that if you look
at fact-based beliefs, so sometimes we have the feeling
that it's almost impossible to believe something else if
there is evidence speaking for a certain belief. So,
imagine, um, I am now telling you that the
United States is a colony of Great Britain and
you have a lot of evidence that speaks against
it. So even if I would offer you a
lot of money, you probably couldn't change your mind.
So you really are like convinced you have so
much evidence that the US is no more, no
longer a colony of Great Britain, that you would
not change your mind. So here it seems like.
Evidence is um uh like a limiting feature of
how free we are to choose what to believe.
And he investigated this in um a study with
younger children, uh, 5 to 6 year old children,
um, also, and adults, and ran 3 different conditions
where he manipulated how much evidence a person or
what kind of evidence a person has, um. To
base their belief on. And he did this by
showing the kids, um, A picture book story, and
in this picture books, the kid saw a character
and the character formed the belief that the weather
is sunny, it's sunny outside, but there were different
conditions and how much evidence this character had for
this belief. There was a strong evidence condition where
the character um went to the living room, looked
outside the window and saw that the sun was
shining. So there, the character had strong evidence for
their belief. And then there was another condition where
the character had no evidence for their belief, so
the character stayed in the bedroom that didn't have
any windows and still formed the belief, it's sunny
outside. And in the third condition, there was counter-evidence.
So, the character went to the living room, looked
out of the window, it's raining, but formed a
belief, it's sunny outside. And then the kids were
asked, and also adults, so would it be possible
that this character would hold the opposite belief instead,
so that it's raining outside. And interestingly, um, even
the youngest children as well as the the adults
really seem, um, perceive that this evidence is restricting
the freedom that this character has to form their
beliefs. So, in the strong evidence condition, they said
that it's almost impossible to, to change their mind.
So you kind of, you almost must believe that
it is sunny outside if you've seen it. But
when there was no evidence or if there was
even evidence leading into a different direction, they said
it's very possible that you hold a different belief,
um, or almost you need to change your mind
if there's evidence, uh, speaking for the contrary. Mhm.
But, uh, do the kinds of intuitions people have
about other people being able to control their own
beliefs or the kind of control they have over
their own beliefs depend on whether we are talking
about fact-based or value-based beliefs?
Yeah, um, that is actually the second condition that
Josh, um, the 2nd study that Josh ran there
he looked at value-based beliefs. And here, similar to
for the fact-based beliefs, it is the evidence that
is limiting what beliefs are possible, and his hypothesis
here was that for value-based beliefs, it's morality, whether
we think a certain belief is possible to hold
or not. And here he also again had three
conditions. Um, ONE condition where a character formed a
moral belief, an immoral belief, and one where it
was neither moral or immoral, where the character just
like had a, um, stated like a certain opinion
or preference. So to give you a more detailed
example of how this looked like, it was a
character called Ashley, who is um in a park
and she sees, A boy um who, like, falls
from his bike, and then in the moral condition,
she formed the belief, it's bad that this uh
boy fell from the bike and hurt himself. And
in the immoral condition, Ashley formed the belief, it's
good that this boy fell from the bike and
hurt himself. And in the opinion condition, um, the,
the boy, she was just seeing that the boy
sits next to his bike, she didn't observe the
falling process. And, um, formed this opinion, oh, it's,
it's good that this bike, um, is yellow. And
then we presented uh the kids and adults with,
um, the, an alternative belief and us, is it
possible to hold this alternative belief? And when they
had formed, when Ashley had formed a moral belief
in the beginning, we presented. The um with an
immoral belief and ask, could it instead be also
um the case that Ashley thinks that it is
good that the boy fell from the bike? Or
if Ashley had formed the immoral belief, we asked
them, could it instead be that it's um bad,
that Ashley thinks it's bad that the boy fell
um from the bike. And in the case of
the opinion condition, we simply asked them. Could it
also be that Ashley thinks it's good if the
bike was blue instead of yellow? And here we
also found interesting condition differences. So in the moral
condition, most or the majority of participants, um, Had
the feeling that it is actually not so likely
that you change your mind, versus in the immoral
condition when Ashley was holding an immoral belief, it's
good that the boy fell from the bike, it
was very different, so they had a feeling it,
she should be drawn to the opposite, so she
should be drawn to um thinking it would be
possible um that it was bad, so drawn to,
towards the moral side. And also in the opinion,
um, condition, kids and adults had the feeling it's,
um, or the preference to, to say that it's
OK to, you have a lot of control of
your of your beliefs. So you can believe that
it's good that the bike is blue or yellow.
Um, AND then we found in one of the
conditions also an interesting age difference or age effects,
and that was in, in the moral condition. There
we found that the youngest kids had the feeling,
it is really like this, this morality is really
restricting of what you can believe or not. So,
if you believe it is bad, the um boy
fell from the bike, it's really almost impossible to
believe the opposite. But this actually this effect um
reduced the older participants got with adults, Um, thinking
that it is actually still pretty possible that you
could think the opposite, that you also could hold
an immoral belief. So it seems like Um, especially
for the younger age groups, morality really seems to
restrict the beliefs that seem to be possible. Compared
to the older ones. Mhm.
Right. And are there big differences between the judgments
made by children and adults?
Yeah, the, the differences that we found are, are
restricted to the second study where we looked at
value-based beliefs and, um, the differences were really the
ones that we found in this morality condition. So
only there in the morality condition, if the, uh,
the kids and the um, we had 55 and
6 year olds, 7 and 8-year-olds and adults, and
there we, we found that the Um, younger children
thought that the beliefs are really restricted by this
morality, so they thought it's almost impossible to hold
an immoral instead of a moral belief. But the
older the kids got, so even the 7 and
8 year olds and the adults thought it is
more possible to also change your mind to a
moral belief, and we, Oh, we, we don't really,
um, exactly studied what are the underlying mechanisms for
this, but our interpretation was that the more you
are um uh confronted or more experiences you also
get with like immoral behaviors of other people, the
more likely you see it, you, you think it
is that people can also change their mind, um,
and hold immoral beliefs.
So let's get into the topic of belief revision.
What, what is that?
Yeah, we um have already slightly hinted at this.
Um, SO belief revision is the process of changing
your mind when new information arrives, and especially when
this information contradicts what you already believe. And I
think it's important um to distinguish two concepts there.
So one is belief updating, and the other is
belief revision. And belief updating is um that you
hold a certain belief. Um, FOR example, uh, going
back to the, um, false belief example, in the
beginning, a reward is in one box, and then
you see, for example, how an, uh, agent is
taking this, um, object out and you remove it,
and we removes it in the second box. And
then you can update your beliefs, so you see
this change happening, you can update your belief that
uh now the object is not anymore in A
but in B, and you've observed this process. So
there is not really a conflict happening, but still
your belief has changed. And that is what we
call belief updating. And if there is a conflict,
um, for example, imagine you haven't observed this process
of how the object is removed from A to
B. Um, THEN it's really a conflict. So, if
you suddenly see, oh, now the object is in
B, then you realize, oh, it cannot be true
anymore that it is in A. So there is
a conflict between these two beliefs, and you need
to decide, is my new evidence strong enough that
I need to abandon my former belief and take
on my new belief.
And and how does belief revision develop in children?
So far what I know of in the research,
most of the studies look at kids in the
age range from 4 and 5 years. For 4
and 5 years and that also makes sense and
so far if you think about that, um, this
is the age when they are able to understand
the concept of a belief. So they understand that
beliefs can be false and um maybe are more
flexible in um in changing their beliefs. And in
my own studies where I also looked at um
4 and 5 year olds, we found that. At
this age range, like so early, they actually, kids
already changed their beliefs in very rational ways, and
that they consider, Um, not only, like, new information
coming in, but they also consider what foundation they
base their initial beliefs on.
Mhm. And on what basis do children revise their
beliefs then?
Yeah, so They, they do consider what we found
in our own study that they do always consider,
yeah, their prior beliefs and the, uh, the strength
of their prior beliefs, and then they compare this
to the new evidence coming in and the quality
of new, of the new evidence and how we
did this in our study, um, we also had
again two boxes, um, that is how a lot
of our research works and The kids, um, we're
told in one of these boxes is a reward
for you. And then, We, um, manipulated the prior
belief of whether the children thinks it's in box
A or box B by asking the children, can
you bring the boxes over to the table where
the study is taking place? And when the kids
picked up these boxes, one of the boxes was,
was either heavier or made a noise, so that
they thought, oh, it's probably the reward is in
there. So they had some evidence that the reward
is in one of these boxes. Um, So in
that condition, they had strong evidence actually, in, for
example, the, the reward is in box A because
it's heavier. And then we presented them with an
alternative, uh, new evidence that the reward is in
the respective other box. And what we did in
our study that is, was that we gave them
verbal reasons. So we were interested in how, um,
can children like evaluate verbal reasons and integrate them
with their prior knowledge. And in that case, one
of the reasons, the reason was either good or
was bad. So for example, um, imagine you have
strong evidence that um the reward is in box
A, but then somebody tells you, but the reward
is actually in box B because I've seen it
in there, so I know it because I've seen
it in there. So that would be a good
reason, and now we have like two good reasons,
like, like, um, contradicting each other. Alternatively, if you
have this strong evidence and somebody else tells you,
oh, I think it's in box B because that
box is my favorite color, then it's rather a
weak reason, so here you would rather not change
your mind. And in another condition, we also manipulated
whether they have prior evidence at all. So if
they brought over the boxes and both of them
were equally heavy or none of them made a
noise, then they didn't have any evidence, prior evidence
to base their belief on. So there we were,
maybe it would be more likely that they're swayed
by the argument presented afterwards. And what we found
was that actually kids relate change their beliefs in
a very rational way, so they really incorporated the
strength of their prior belief, whether it was based
on evidence or not, and the quality of the
argument that was presented afterwards. So if they didn't
have any prior belief but were presented with a
strong argument afterwards, they very often change their mind.
On the other hand, if they um had very
strong ri belief, but presented with a weak argument,
it's only my favorite color, they almost never change
their mind. And in these two other conditions where
they had strong evidence and were presented with a
strong argument, we found that actually in 50% of
the cases, they changed their mind. And when they
did not have any evidence, and then they were
presented with a weak reason, we found that they
changed their mind a little bit more than 50%.
So it seemed like it is, they, they don't
have any clue. It is a bad reason that
it's a favorite color, but it's maybe still better
than nothing because you don't have any idea what
is happening. So they're, they still, um, some of
them followed this, this argument even though it was
a bad one.
So those are the kinds of reasons that children
consider when revising their beliefs, right?
Yeah, so that is um Those reasons are everywhere
mostly interested in something that you also call like
first order evidence, so we um really gave a
reason that speaks directly for or against the belief.
And we also in an additional study in the
same paper, we ran, um, we looked at what
the kids also consider. So-called second-order evidence and second-order
evidence, um, the way we defined it was either
like confirming or like undermining the evidence for a
belief. So it was, um, in our case, we
called it also meta reason, so it really was
a reason about the reason and um to give
you an example again, we ran a study where
um So the kids were looking for a pet
that was lost, and they were presented with a
picture where they saw like two bushes, a bush
with red berries and a bush with purple berries,
and they saw that there were like duck prints.
So the animal that was lost was a duck,
and they saw that there were duck prints, um,
footprints, um, leading to one of the bushes, and
the kids were asked, where do you think the
duck is hiding? And Um, then the kids, most
of them were correctly, like, inferred the duck is
hiding behind the bush, um, where the footprints lead
to. And then in the next step, we gave
them either confirming or undermining evidence. So we either
said, yes, you're right, so these footprints look like
duck footprints, and we showed a picture of how
duck footprints look like. And in, in, in the
other condition, we actually said, oh wait, these footprints
don't look like duck footprints because duck footprints look
like this, and we showed them how duck footprints
look like. And then we ask them, um, again,
so where do you think the duck is hiding?
And in the undermining condition, so where we're presenting,
presented them with this undermining second order evidence, kids
much more often change their belief compared to the
condition where their um initial evidence was confirmed.
Right. OK, so changing topics, what do people consider
to be good reasoning?
Yeah, so, um, I think what people, the way
people can evaluate other other's reasoning is like twofold.
So you can see whether a person gets to
the right conclusions, gets to the right outcomes, or
you can also um like investigate and evaluate the
process that people use to go to, to get
to a certain outcome. And, um, sometimes these two
things, um, interfere or don't, uh, um, lead in
the same direction. So, for example, if you're presented
with, um, Somebody who reaches a correct conclusion, but
you know that the processes that they used were
completely irrational, so maybe to decide whether a reward
is in box A or box B, they just
were throwing a coin, then you would say this
was an irrational process that they used, and they
were simply lucky to get to the right conclusion,
but still they got it right. And this is
something that we looked at in um children and
also adults from different cultures, so we went to
study from kids. In the United States and in
China, and we presented them with pretty much exactly
the same scenario that I just explained to you.
Again, it was a lost pet and um the
kids were tasked, so where is the pet? Um,
AND then one of the characters in the story
was using an irrational procedure of figuring out where,
where the pet is hiding, and they were just
using, so we had several, uh, versions of this,
but for example, just using like, um, Um, what
do you call it? One of these boards where
you with an error and you, um, Make the
arrow flip and then you um uh it points
at a certain um color in this board. And
then um uh the kids were asked, um, or
the characters said, OK, I believe that the pet
is hiding behind um the bush with the purple
berries because that is what um my random process,
um, just like. Came up with, um, but by
accident, the character was right. Um, AND the other
character, for example, used, um, the correct procedure. And
he, the correct procedure was in this case, or
a rational procedure, which was in this case, looking
for evidence. So looking for, for example, for footprints
on the floor and inferring, oh, the animal is
in this hiding location. But unknown to these characters,
um, the animal has changed location in the meantime,
so it was not anymore in the bush where
the footprints lead to. So in the end, the
character who had used a random procedure. Came to
the right conclusion and the character who has used
the um rational procedure came to the wrong conclusion.
And then we asked kids, um, which of these
characters do you think did the better job and
also which of these characters would you prefer to
um ask for help if you needed help in
finding something. And then we found an interesting um
difference, an interesting developmental difference that 4 and 5
year olds had always a strong preference for the
character who got to the right outcome, independent of
whether they used uh wrong or, or like let's
say a rational or rational procedure. And adults had
a strong preference for the character who used the
rational procedure, independent of whether they reached a correct
or incorrect outcome. And we found some interesting differences
actually in the middle age ranges between like 6
and um 9 years of age, because we found
that the kids in China actually had earlier on
a preference for the character who used a rational
procedure over the character who came to the correct
outcome. And the kids in the United States had
the same switch, so they also, um, uh, This
developmental switch that they at some point preferred the
character with the rational procedure, um, but it happened
a little bit later. In the United States, it
was around 78 years of age. And we were,
um, wondering, so why did we find this developmental
difference in these two cultures. And um thought it
could be that in China, um, people are often
like raised with a more like holistic picture of
the world and trying to really see relation among,
for example, like processes and outcomes and maybe this
helps these kids to like earlier on, um, make
this developmental switch and evaluating rather the process compared
to the outcome when they observe um, Yeah, actions
or like reasoning of other people.
Yeah, that, that's really interesting to find and explain
these cross cultural differences, but also the aspects in
which there is universality, I guess. So, uh, I
have one last topic I would like to ask
you about. So you have some. Recent exciting findings
that suggest that chimpanzees respond to higher order evidence.
Could you tell us about that? First of all,
tell us what higher order evidence is and then
what you did there in that study.
Yeah, um, yeah, so in this study, it actually
we, we started out by also um investigating belief
revision. In chimpanzees, and we found it very similar
to the study that I explained earlier with kids,
it was that chimpanzees revise their beliefs in rational
ways, so if they form an initial belief based
on weak evidence, but afterwards are represented with stronger
evidence, then they change their mind. However, when it's
the other way around, when they are first presented
with strong evidence and they base their initial belief
on strong evidence, and now later on presented with
the weak evidence, then they stick to their initial
belief. And in the second step, we were interested
in, uh, can chimpanzees also um understand the second
order evidence, also similar to um to what we
have done with children. Um, AND here we looked
at whether they understand also undermining. Undermining evidence. And
in that case, in the kids' version of the
study, we had this like confirming or disconfirming um
reasons and we said, oh, these duck, these footprints
don't look like duck, duck footprints, and of course
that was not possible to do with chimpanzees. So
we had to come up with A nonverbal version
of this task. And here again, we had like
two boxes and the question was, um, in which
of these two boxes is the apple hidden, and
then we presented the chimpanzees with different pieces of
evidence. And in this study where we looked at
um the second-order evidence, we first showed them a
weak evidence for one box, and in this case,
we just lifted this box, we shook it, and
we put it down, and the chimpanzees probably inferred,
um, as we know from previous work, um, they
can use this clue, the apple is in this
box where I heard the noise. So they could
make a choice, they chose the one where they've
heard the noise. And then in the next step,
we presented them with strong evidence, so we were
turning around the box and we showed them, like,
through a blurry window, that there was um an
apple in there. They saw something that looks like
an apple through a blurry window, and there was
strong evidence, strong visual evidence that, oh, probably the
noise that I just heard was something else, it
was probably not the apple, but now I've seen
it, so it must be in the other box,
so I, I should change my mind. Um, AND
that is also what most of the, um, chimps
did, as we've known from the, uh, previous study.
And then in the next step, we actually showed
them like undermining an epistemic defeater. So we showed
them that this evidence, this strong evidence that they've
just based their belief on is not really valid,
and how did we do that? So, we took,
um, like a second screen that was in this
box out that had a picture of an apple
on it. So what they've just seen earlier, what
was not the actual apple, it was just a
picture of an apple. And now if they can
make this inference that, oh, there's strong evidence that
I've just seen was now defeated by the evidence
of like, it's just a picture, they should actually
change their mind, and they should change their mind
back to um what they've heard initially. So now,
The shaking, the shaking noise that they heard initially
was actually the strongest evidence that they had overall
because this other piece of visual evidence was defeated.
And we, we found that if we defeated this
evidence, if we showed them this picture of the
apple, the chimpanzees were much more likely to change
their mind and switch back to the initial uh
box that they had chosen. Um, COMPARED to when
we didn't defeat this evidence, so in a controlled
condition, we also took a screen out of this
box, but there was no picture of, of the
apple on it, and then most of the chimpanzees
stuck to their strong visual evidence and chose the
box where they had seen the apple.
So would one of the goals here be to
understand the phylogenetic roots of this kind of reasoning
and perhaps trying to establish a link between chimpanzees
and humans when it when it comes to the
evolution of this kind of reason.
Yeah, certainly. Um, SO, I think the important question
here in the background is like about rationality. So,
rationality is one of these like features that many
philosophers, like, I guess, like starting or maybe even
before Aristotle, um say that rationality is really just
what makes us human. And, The question is, uh,
is that really the case? So, it's really rationality
one of these defining features that only humans possess.
And if you look at, um, rationality also has
many definitions, um, but the definition that we here,
um, looked at was really um responding to reasons.
So are we a rational agent responds to reasons
and how can you test whether a rational agent
responds to reasons? And the idea was you can
pretty much test that if somebody follows a reason,
yes, that is something that we've already known that
chimpanzees also follow evidence, for example, they Um, can
follow like yogurt traces and know, OK, that, that
that's the trace that leads to, to the cup,
um, where I can actually find the yogurt so
they can use evidence, but the question was, can
they also understand that evidence can be defeated? And
this really shows that they understand pretty much a
reason as a reason, because when they know that
this reason is not valid anymore, they don't use
it.
Right. OK, so Hannah, uh, what kinds of work
are you going to be doing in the near
future? I mean, what kinds of topics are you
expecting to explore?
Yeah, I'm super curious to keep on working on
um the cross-species comparison um that is related to
rationality. And I'm currently planning a study where we
look at the social aspect of rationality. So for
example, do we consider what um What evidence another
person bases their beliefs on, and then do we
like consider this and also like compare this with
our own evidence, and that is something that we
could also like do with chimpanzees and see whether
they consider if they get a clue from another
individual where the food is, do they consider whether
this individual had evidence for their beliefs or not.
Um, SO this is something that I'm very interested
in. But more recently, even though that is not
yet uh a very planned out, I'm also really
interested in, in AI how humans use AI as
evidence um to form their beliefs and maybe how
and what kind of features AI would need to
have that we evaluated maybe more critically. Um, BUT
those are very um unbaked ideas at the moment.
Um, BUT I would love to look in this,
um, a little bit more in the future.
Great, so if people are interested, where can they
find you and your work on the internet?
I, I don't have um like an. A website
on my own, but they find me over the
website of uh my university, the Utrecht University, or
if they just Google my name, Hannah Schleihoff, there's
not that many people with that name, so they
should be able um to find me. I'm also
on, um, Blue Sky. Um, THAT is also one
of the channels, um, I think where people could
reach me.
OK, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been really
fun to talk with you. Thank you. Hi guys,
thank you for watching this interview until the end.
If you liked it, please share it, leave a
like and hit the subscription button. The show is
brought to you by Enlights Learning and Development done
differently. Check their website at enlights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson,
Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam
Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena,
John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru
Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir,
Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and Hal Herzognun,
Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines,
Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan
Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik
Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski,
Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei
Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner,
Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott
Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios
Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa,
Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon.
Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati,
Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert,
Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden,
Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz, and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kaniz and Rosie. Thank you for
all.